---------------------------------CHAPTER 1---------------------------------

			

Napoleon Bonaparte was born at Ajaccio, Corsica, on August 1769.
Such a bald, even banal statement is necessary when we consider that
every aspect of the man's life has been turned into the stuff of legend. In
1919 Archbishop Whateley tried to push beyond legend into myth by
suggesting, tongue-in-cheek, in his Historic Doubts Relative to Napoleon
Bunoparte, that Napoleon has never existed, that his was a proper name
falsely attributed to the French people collectively. The psychologist Carl
Gustav Jung, while accepting the reality of Napoleon's existence, argued
that his significance was wholly collective and not individual: that he 
represented the resurgence from the depths of the French unconscious of 
the savage and irrational forces the Revolution had tried to suppress
through the cult of Reason(Deesse Raison).
	Even those who accepted the importance of Napoleon the indivdual
argued about his origins and his date of birth. There has in some quarters
been a curious reluctance to accept that he was a Corsican at all, even 
though born on the island. Some have asserted that he was descended
from the Greeks, the Carthaginians or the Bretons. Others, remarking his
`Oriental complex` (of which more later), and nothing that in the ninth
century the Arab invaders of Europe reached Corsica, claim an Arab,
Berber or Moorish strain in his provanance; hence (on this view) his
excessive superstition, his belief in ghosts, Destiny and his own star, and
his preference for Islam over Christianity. The historian and crtic Taine
traced his descent to an Italian condottiere, while Disraeli, on the grounds
that Corsica had once been peopled by African Semites, claimed
Napoleon as a Jew (presumably, given Napoleon's later antipathy to the
Jews, an anti-semitic one). Kings of England, the Comneni, the
Paleologues, and even the Julian tribe have been pressed into service as
Napoleon's forebears. The prize for the most absurd candidate as 
Napoleonic ancestor must go to the Man in the Iron Mask and for the
most unlikely parents to the footman and goat girl, proposed by his most
scurrilous enemies.
	At another level of mythmaking, Napoleon's champions claimed that
he emerged from his mother's womb a born warrior because she gave 
birth to him immediately after a hazardous 'flight in the heather' -
retreating through the maquis with Corsican forces after being defeated by
the French. And the French writer Chateaubriand, who knew Napoleon
well and worked for him as a diplomat, argued that the true date of his 
birth was 5 February 1768; according to this theory, it was Napoleon's
brother Joseph who was born on 15 August 1769 and Napoloen was the
eldest son.

				-1-
	
	The sober facts are less sensational. On 2 June 1764 Carlo Buonaparte
of Ajaccio, an eighteen-year-old law student, married the fourteen-year-
old Marie-Letizia Ramolino, also of Ajaccio. Both families were
descended from Italian mercenaries in Genoese pay who settled in
Corsica at the beginning of the sixteenth century. The Buonapartes came
orginally from Tuscany and could trace their lineage to the soldier of 
fortune Ugo Buonaparte, documented as a henchman of the Duke of
Swabia in 1122. Ugo was a veteran of the struggle between Guelphs and
Ghibellines and a devoted supporter of the Holy Roman Emperor in his
conflict with the Pope. The loser in a Florentine power struggle, Ugo
spent his last days in the seaport of Sarzana, and it was from there in the
early sixteenth century that his descendant Francesco Buonaparte
emigrated to Corsica.
	Such at any rate was the Buonaparte family tradition; their surname
was said to denote Ugo's Imperialist affiliations. The earliesr unimpeach-
able record shows a member of the Buonaparte family, a lawyer, as a
member of the Council of Ancients in Ajaccio in 1161; several more
Buonaparte lawyers served on this council in the eighteenth century. The
Bunoapartes like the Ramolinos were part of the Corsican nobility, but it
must be rememebered that Corsican `nobles` were as common as `princes`
in Czarist Russia. Carlo BUonaparte, born on 27 March 1764, had been
studying law at Pisa University but left to marry Letizia without taking
his degree. The romancers have seized on this fact to build up a coup de
foudre love affair between Carlo and Leitizia, but the match was certainly 
dynastic, even though some sections of the Ramolino clan objected to the 
marraige.
	The Ramolinos were a cadet branch of the distinguished Callalto
family, well entrnched in Lombardy since the fourteenth century; the 
Ramolinos themsekves had been established in Corsica for 250 years.
Where the Buonapartes were a family of lawyers, with the Ramolinos the 
tradition was military: Letizia's father was an army officer with expertise
in civil engineering, who commanded the Ajaccio garrison and held the
sinecure office of Inspector-General of Roads and Bridges. Both the
Buonapartes and the Ramolinos specialized in intermarriage with ancient
families of Italian origin, so a dynastic match made sense. There was just 
one peculiarity: both the newly-weds' fathers had died young. Carlo's
father, a lawyer, died in 1760 when his son was fourteen, which meant
that Carlo could bring into the marriage the family house in the Via
Malerba, two of the best vineyards in Ajaccio, some pasture and arable
land, and also his claims to another estate.

				-2-

	Marie-Letizia Ramolino (botn either in late 1749 or early 1750) was in
a more complicated situation. Her father died when she was five, after
which her mother Angela Maria turned for consolation to Francois (or 
Franz) Fesch, a Swiss captain in the French garrison forces at Ajaccio.
Angela Maria married Fesch in 1757 and persuaded him to convert to
Catholicism, but his father, banker in Basle, responded him to convert to 
Catholicism, but his father, a banker in Basle, responded by disinheriting
him. From the union of Fesch and Letizia's mother came Joseph (born 
1763), the future cardinal and Napoleon's uncle, though only six years his
senior. The unfortunate Fesch, who died in 1770, gave Letizia away; her 
dowry comprised thirty-one acres of land, a mill, and an oven for baking
bread.
	The marriage of Carlo and Letizia was a solid, down-to-earth marriage
of Convenience. There is even reason to believe that Carlo hedged his bets
by not marrying in the Church in 1764, or ever. It was well known that
Corsicans took an idiosyncratic, eclectic attitude to the Catholic Church,
which was why legal marriage on the consisted in the agreement of 
the two male heads of families, the signature of a dotal contract, and the 
act of consummation. The likelihood is that Carlo simply refused to go
through with areligious ceremony, and for reasons of pride and saving
face the two clans kept quiet about it.
	Again, contrary to the mythmaking, it is untrue that some of 
the Ramolinos oppsed the match for political reasons, allegedly on the 
grounds that they supported the Genoese masters of the island while the
Buonapartes backed the independence movement under Pasquale Paoli.
Almost certainly, they could strike while, as for political ideology, both the 
Buonapartes and Ramolinos were notorious trimmers who made obei-
sance to whichever party in Corsica had the most power.
	Carlo, a tall young man with a prominent nose, sensual lips and 
almond-shaped eyes, was a hedonist and sensualist. Cunning, self-
regarding, unrefined, unscrupulous, he made it clear that his marriage
was no love match by declaring a preference for a girl of the Forcioli
family. The romancers claim that he was bowled over by Letizia's beauty,
but portraits reveal a woman whose mouth was too small, whose nose was
too long and whose face was too austere for a claim to real beauty to be
advanced. It was true that she was petite(5'1"), with rich dark-brown hair
and slender white hands; and what she had, imcontestably and by
common consent, were large, lustrous, deep-set eyes. As was normal at
the time, Letizia was wholly uneducated and trained in nothing but
domestic skills.


				-3-
	
	

